---
layout: single
title:  "Why blog?"
date:   2022-10-27 21:38:31 -0400
---

I am starting a blog. Why?

***To nurture emergence of increasingly complex holons.***

This is my guiding principle and it has served me well--I attribute much of my recent happiness and satisfaction with life to following this. I want to share this perspective with other people while continuing down this path--these two things are complementary aspects of the same principle.

Let's unpack this a bit more.

## What is a holon?

From [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holon_(philosophy)) "A holon is something that is simultaneously a whole in and of itself, as well as a part of a larger whole."

This comes directly from the writings of [Ken Wilber](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ken_Wilber), the originator of [Integral Theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integral_theory_(Ken_Wilber)). Integral Theory and the concept of of the holon accurately capture the fractal nature of the world and the human's place within it. This is helpful when considering claims about the nature of the world and our place within it.

It is also helpful when trying to understand general trends in the universe. There seems to be a general trend of increasing complexity through its history. Integral Theory has a lot to say about this and the concept of holons and their development and emergence are central to this theory.

In short, time passes and novel, increasingly complex holons emerge.

## What does increasingly complex mean?

Holons emerge in hierarchies--new holons are built with existing holons. As Ken Wilber might say, *new holons transcend and include existing holons*. The new ones create larger, more inclusive wholes of which existing holons become a part. Think about how multicellular organisms emerged by incorporating existing single cellular organisms into a larger more efficient symbiotic unit--multicellular organisms didn't replace single cellular ones, they created and filled new niches by being functionally differentiated. These new multicellular holons are deeper within (or higher above depending on perspective) and inclusive of the nested hierarchy of extant holons. They include more holons within their boundaries and are thus more complex.

A feature of Integral Theory that is largely missing from the current common understanding of science is the emphasis of an internal and external aspect of a holon. Science today is primarily concerned with external, objective aspects. External experiences are those which are measurable and communicable. It is how a holon is experienced from the outside, by other holons--what a holon looks (sounds, feels, etc) like. Contrast this with internal aspects, which can only be known by an individual instance of a holon itself--what does it feel like to be a bat? What does it feel like to be you?

When you burn your hand in a fire, there are things that can be measured about the event--the temperature of the skin on your hand, the flow of blood to the injured area, how quickly you pull your hand away from the heat, how loudly you scream, etc. This is how another would experience the event from the outside. There is a corresponding subjective experience of what it feels like to burn your hand--searing pain, the rhythmic throbbing, sensitivity to touch, etc. This is the experience from within.

If all holons have external and internal experiences, it may appear that Integral Theory is advocating for a sort of [panpsychism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panpsychism). In some sense this may be true in that much more of the world has subjective experience than you think--but alien experiences are not human-like.

### Choice

Not all complex holons are worth nurturing. Nature explores the possible design space through differentiation and finds sustainable solutions through [natural selection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_selection). Pardon the anthropomorphization of the evolutionary process, but it is a useful way to explain. Most holons will collapse under their own complexity. Novelty isn't stable by default.

This is probably most familiarly demonstrated by biological evolution. Most of the species that have ever existed have gone extinct.

This is true of complex holons outside of the biological domain as well. Most ideas don't go anywhere, most new companies fail, most nations and cultures are gone. 

How can we know what holons will lead to increasing complexity?

I don't think we can know for sure, but comparing [Finite and Infinite Games](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_and_Infinite_Games) can shed some light on this.
 
### Infinite games

James P. Carse describes infinite games in his book linked above. Some notable features of infinite games include:

1. Infinite games have no predetermined ending
2. They are multiplayer
3. They have no fixed rules
5. They are not zero-sum

In the book, Carse provides some indisputable examples including marriage, parenting, religion, politics and friendship. These examples are interesting because they all involve people directly.

Collectively, evolution can be viewed as a infinite game--an individual life is not. This indicates that the emergence of complexity and infinite games are related. Specifically, infinite games and complex systems involve the presence of multiple interconnected parts and no fixed end point. Infinite games can also express adaptability and emergent behavior, similar to complex systems.

Some examples of complex systems that could be viewed as infinite games:

- Ecosystems
- Economies
- The human brain
- Social systems (families, communities, societies)

Complex systems that are finite games:

- Business cycles
- Technology lifecycle
- Time boxed evolutionary cycles

Infinite games that are not complex systems:

- simon says
- duck, duck, goose
- follow the leader

Complex systems may be finite or infinite games and infinite games may be complex or simple systems--there is not 1-1 parity but there is enough overlap to make the connection useful.

A good start when answering the question *How can we know what holons will lead to increasing complexity?* is to also ask if the game you are playing is an infinite one.

Some additional questions to ask yourself:

- Is this activity in alignment with holons that are "below", that it depends upon (eg healthy humans and relationships, healthy biosphere, etc.) or does it undermine the substrate on which it depends? 

should they be persistent? not necessarily--some holons are transitory. destruction of something may be as valuable as creation. destruction may be required to get out of a local maxima.

## How does a blog nurture complexity?

 This blog directly supports connectivity and collaboration. It is multiplayer, there are no fixed rules and it could go indefinitely. And one of my favorite features of infinite games, it is not zero-sum. The benefits conferred to you and to me by me writing this is at nobody's expense.

This guiding principle implies that I am simultaneously an emergent process of the world and a steward of the universal process that created me. Importantly, this perspective helps me orient myself in the world by making claims about my origin and purpose. Without this orienting

- Creating a reference point for ideas, launch point for discussions
- Sharing my perspective of the world
- Connecting with like minded people
- Clarifying and refining ideas
- Personal landing page

