---
layout: single
title:  "Why do I care about privacy?"
date:   2022-10-27 21:38:31 -0400
---

I like to think about whether what I am doing contributes to the complexification of the universe. This involves exploring at least 2 different perspectives.

1. How is what I am doing part of a finite/infinite game? How will my actions contribute to the ongoing play of the game?
2. How is what I am doing part of a complex system? How will my actions influence the dynamics of the system?

## Infinite games

Privacy changes the rules by which the current game is played. In favor of less powerful individuals. It equalizes the playing field to a significant degree. 

Reduces information asymmetry--less powerful people don't have the resources to aggregate and synthesize as much information as powerful people. When the less powerful have privacy, the powerful cannot use information that they do not have. This alters the capabilities and actions of the powerful. 

Presumably, powerful individuals with an asymmetric information advantage are not going to use this advantage altruistically. They are going to use it to benefit themselves over others. 

Does a more equal information landscape make a better infinite game? Does it allow for emergence of more complex systems?

This may be the case.

Successful institutions (companies, governments) have disproportionate resources for gathering and processing information. They are better able to do it than disorganized groups of people of similar size. Successful institutions are also interested reducing/eliminating competition (for governments, invaders, revolutionaries, etc, for companies, competition, new tech, etc.) There is a real incentive for successful institutions to ossify the rules of the game to keep power--if the rules change to much and they don't adapt, they may become irrelevant. And large institutions find it difficult to adapt--they are actually very bad at it.

Younger, more agile, creative, smaller teams of people may be able to tackle the problems of a larger institution more effectively and efficiently--but they may never get the chance to prove themselves if they are being actively attacked by incumbent organizations. Is this okay? Perhaps it is, but I would like to see more diversity in the approaches we (all people) explore to collectively grow and thrive. More diversity means more possible interactions, connections and collaboration between effective, capable people.

Actions to disrupt and equalize an wildly asymmetric information landscape may make for a better infinite game and allow for emergence of more complex systems.

Privacy does this.